---
title: "Genetic Programming"
permalink: /research/areas/gp
read_time: false
toc: true
author_profile: true
date: 2026-02-06
last_modified_at: 2026-02-09
tags: ["optimization", "GP", "metaheuristics"]
---

Genetic Programming&nbsp;(GP) means to perform evolutionary search in a tree-based search space.
Often, such trees are designed to represent {% include taglink.liquid tag="algorithm_synthesis" tag_text="programs" %} of sorts, sometimes {% include taglink.liquid tag="classification" tag_text="classifiers" -%}.
This field is somehow in decline with the advent of deep learning.
However, there are quite a few interesting things that can be done.

{% assign gppapers=site.data.publications | where_exp: "item", "item.tags contains 'GP'" -%}

## Algorithm Synthesis
For me, the most interesting topic of Genetic Programming was always {% include taglink.liquid tag="algorithm_synthesis" tag_text="algorithm synthesis" -%}.
Here, the goal is to use optimization algorithms to construct new algorithms.
Matter of fact, combining GP with {% include taglink.liquid tag="FFA" %} yields very good performance when constructing discrete algorithms.
Sadly, I never had time to follow this line of research more in depth, but I hope to do so in the future.
{%- assign algopapers=gppapers | where_exp: "item", "item.tags contains 'algorithm_synthesis'" -%}
{::nomarkdown}{%- include publications.liquid papers=algopapers shorter=true -%}{:/}

## Classification
{% include taglink.liquid tag="classification" tag_text="Classification" %} is another classical application area of Genetic Programming.
Since many traditional classification approaches use decision trees in one way or another and GP means searching the space of trees, this comes very natural.
{%- assign classpapers=gppapers | where_exp: "item", "item.tags contains 'classification'" -%}
{::nomarkdown}{%- include publications.liquid papers=classpapers shorter=true -%}{:/}

## Other Topics
Besides algorithm synthesis and classification, I also applied Genetic Programming to some other domains, such as {% include taglink.liquid tag="logistics" -%}.
{%- assign other=gppapers -%}
{%- for pa in algopapers -%}
    {%- assign other=other | where_exp: "item", "item != pa" -%}
{%- endfor -%}
{%- for pb in classpapers -%}
    {%- assign other=other | where_exp: "item", "item != pb" -%}
{%- endfor -%}
{::nomarkdown}{%- include publications.liquid papers=other shorter=true -%}{:/}
